README.md, before:

![The Buf logo](./.github/buf-logo.svg)

# hyperpb

`hyperpb` is a highly optimized dynamic message library for Protobuf or read-only
workloads. It is designed to be a drop-in replacement for
[`dynamicpb`](https://pkg.go.dev/google.golang.org/protobuf/types/dynamicpb),
`protobuf-go`'s canonical solution for working with completely dynamic messages.

`hyperpb`'s parser is an efficient VM for a special instruction set, a variant of
table-driven parsing (TDP), pioneered by [the UPB project](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/tree/main/upb).

Our parser is very fast, beating `dynamicpb` by 10x, and often beating
`protobuf-go`'s generated code by a factor of 2-3x, especially for workloads with
many nested messages.

<!-- TODO: benchmarks -->

## Usage

The core conceit of `hyperpb` is that you must pre-compile a parser using
`hyperpb.Compile` at runtime, much like regular expressions require that you use
`regexp.Compile` them. Doing this allows `hyperpb` to run optimization passes on
your message, and delaying it to runtime allows us to continuously improve
layout optimizations, withing making any source-breaking changes.

For example, let's say that we want to compile a parser for some type baked into
our binary, and parse some data with it.

```go
// Compile a type for your message. Make sure to cache this!
ty := hyperpb.CompileFor[*weatherv1.WeatherReport]()

data := /* ... */

// Allocate a fresh message using that type.
msg := hyperpb.New(ty)

// Parse the message, using proto.Unmarshal like any other message type.
if err := proto.Unmarshal(data, msg); err != nil {
    // Handle parse failure.
}

// Use reflection to read some fields. hyperpb currently only supports access
// by reflection. You can also look up fields by index using fields.Get(), which
// is less legible but doesn't hit a hashmap.
fields := ty.Descriptor().Fields()

// Get returns a protoreflect.Value, which can be printed directly...
fmt.Println(msg.Get(fields.ByName("region")))

// ... or converted to an explicit type to operate on, such as with List(),
// which converts a repeated field into something with indexing operations.
stations := msg.Get(fields.ByName("weather_stations")).List()
for i := range stations.Len() {
    // Get returns a protoreflect.Value too, so we need to convert it into
    // a message to keep extracting fields.
    station := stations.Get(i).Message()
    fields := station.Descriptor().Fields()

    // Here we extract each of the fields we care about from the message.
    // Again, we could use fields.Get if we know the indices.
    fmt.Println("station:", station.Get(fields.ByName("station")))
    fmt.Println("frequency:", station.Get(fields.ByName("frequency")))
    fmt.Println("temperature:", station.Get(fields.ByName("temperature")))
    fmt.Println("pressure:", station.Get(fields.ByName("pressure")))
    fmt.Println("wind_speed:", station.Get(fields.ByName("wind_speed")))
    fmt.Println("conditions:", station.Get(fields.ByName("conditions")))
}
```

Currently, `hyperpb` only supports manipulating messages through the reflection
API; it shines best when you need write a very generic service that
downloads types off the network and parses messages using those types, which
forces you to use reflection.

Mutation is currently not supported; any operation which would mutate an
already-parsed message will panic. Which methods of `*hyperpb.Message` panic
is included in the documentation.

### Using types from a registry

We can use the `hyperpb.CompileFromBytes` function to parse a dynamic type and
use it to walk the fields of a message:

```go
ty := hyperpb.CompileFromBytes(encodedSchema, messageName) // Remember to cache this!

msg := hyperpb.New(ty)
if err := proto.Unmarshal(data, msg); err != nil {
    // Handle parse failure.
}

// Range will iterate over all of the populated fields in msg. Here we
// use Range with go1.24 iterator syntax.
for field, value := range msg.Range {
    // Do something with each populated field.
}
```

Since any generic, non-mutating operation will work with `hyperpb` messages,
we can use them as an efficient transcoding medium from the wire format, for
runtime-loaded messages.

```go
// Unmarshal like before.
ty := hyperpb.CompileFromBytes(encodedSchema, messageName)
msg := hyperpb.New(ty)
if err := proto.Unmarshal(data, msg); err != nil {
    // ...
}

// Dump the message to JSON. This just works!
bytes, err := protojson.Marshal(msg)
```

`protovalidate` also works directly on reflection, so it works out-of-the-box:

```go
// Unmarshal like before.
ty := hyperpb.CompileFromBytes(encodedSchema, messageName)
msg := hyperpb.New(ty)
if err := proto.Unmarshal(data, msg); err != nil {
    // Handle parse failure.
}

// Run custom validation. This just works!
err := protovalidate.Validate(msg)
```

## Advanced Usage

`hyperpb` is all about parsing as fast as possible, so there are a number of
optimization knobs available. Calling `Message.Unmarshal` directly instead
of `proto.Unmarshal` allows setting custom `UnmarshalOption`s:

```go
ty := hyperpb.CompileFromBytes(encodedSchema, messageName)
msg := hyperpb.New(ty)

// Unmarshal with custom performance knobs.
err := msg.Unmarshal(data,
    hyperpb.WithMaxDecodeMisses(16),
    // ...
)
```

The compiler also takes `CompileOptions`, such as for configuring how extensions
are resolved:

```go
ty := hyperpb.CompileFromBytes(encodedSchema, messageName,
    hyperpb.WithExtensionsFromTypes(typeRegistry),
)
```

### Memory Reuse

`hyperpb` also has a memory-reuse mechanism that side-steps the Go garbage
collector for improved allocation latency. `hyperpb.Shared` is book-keeping
state and resources shared by all messages resulting from the same parse.
After the message goes out of scope, these resources are ordinarily reclaimed
by the garbage collector.

However, a `hyperpb.Shared` can be retained after its associated message goes
away, allowing for re-use. Consider the following example of a request handler:

```go
type requestContext struct {
    shared *hyperpb.Shared
    types map[string]*hyperpb.Type
    // ...
}

func (c *requestContext) Handle(req Request) {
    // ...
    ty := types[req.Type]
    msg := c.shared.New(ty)
    defer c.shared.Free()

    c.process(msg, req, ...)
}
```

Beware that `msg` must not outlive the call to `Shared.Free`; failure to do so
will result in memory errors that Go cannot protect you from.

## Compatibility

`hyperpb` is experimental software, and the API may change drastically before
`v1`. It also does not implement all of Protobuf: currently, the following are
not supported:

- `group`-typed fields (currently parsed as unknown fields).

## Contributing

For a detailed explanation of the implementation details of `hyperpb`, see
the [`DESIGN.md`](DESIGN.md) file. Contributions that significantly change the
parser will require benchmarks; you can run them with `make bench`.

## Legal

Offered under the [Apache 2 license](https://github.com/bufbuild/bufplugin-go/blob/main/LICENSE).

Commit message:

Implement support for groups
This PR adds support for one final Protobuf feature: groups. Although
groups are deprecared in `proto2` and not present in `proto3`, there is
nothing stopping users from needing to parse them, particularly since
they are available in editions mode.

Groups are implemented by retaining the end-group tag in `vm.P1`, and
checking for it whenever parsing a regular tag fails enough times. An
alternative strategy would be to generate a unique `tdp.TypeParser` for
each group-typed field, which includes the group end tag among its
fields. This would eliminate the cost of checking for group termination
for messages. However, that would be fairly tricky to implement, since
popping a message inside of a thunk probably won't work right.

There were several places where we had to adjust the "message tail call"
optimization to account for groups, since groups can't be tail-called
(either as callee or caller).

README.md, after:

![The Buf logo](./.github/buf-logo.svg)

# hyperpb

`hyperpb` is a highly optimized dynamic message library for Protobuf or read-only
workloads. It is designed to be a drop-in replacement for
[`dynamicpb`](https://pkg.go.dev/google.golang.org/protobuf/types/dynamicpb),
`protobuf-go`'s canonical solution for working with completely dynamic messages.

`hyperpb`'s parser is an efficient VM for a special instruction set, a variant of
table-driven parsing (TDP), pioneered by [the UPB project](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/tree/main/upb).

Our parser is very fast, beating `dynamicpb` by 10x, and often beating
`protobuf-go`'s generated code by a factor of 2-3x, especially for workloads with
many nested messages.

<!-- TODO: benchmarks -->

## Usage

The core conceit of `hyperpb` is that you must pre-compile a parser using
`hyperpb.Compile` at runtime, much like regular expressions require that you use
`regexp.Compile` them. Doing this allows `hyperpb` to run optimization passes on
your message, and delaying it to runtime allows us to continuously improve
layout optimizations, withing making any source-breaking changes.

For example, let's say that we want to compile a parser for some type baked into
our binary, and parse some data with it.

```go
// Compile a type for your message. Make sure to cache this!
ty := hyperpb.CompileFor[*weatherv1.WeatherReport]()

data := /* ... */

// Allocate a fresh message using that type.
msg := hyperpb.New(ty)

// Parse the message, using proto.Unmarshal like any other message type.
if err := proto.Unmarshal(data, msg); err != nil {
    // Handle parse failure.
}

// Use reflection to read some fields. hyperpb currently only supports access
// by reflection. You can also look up fields by index using fields.Get(), which
// is less legible but doesn't hit a hashmap.
fields := ty.Descriptor().Fields()

// Get returns a protoreflect.Value, which can be printed directly...
fmt.Println(msg.Get(fields.ByName("region")))

// ... or converted to an explicit type to operate on, such as with List(),
// which converts a repeated field into something with indexing operations.
stations := msg.Get(fields.ByName("weather_stations")).List()
for i := range stations.Len() {
    // Get returns a protoreflect.Value too, so we need to convert it into
    // a message to keep extracting fields.
    station := stations.Get(i).Message()
    fields := station.Descriptor().Fields()

    // Here we extract each of the fields we care about from the message.
    // Again, we could use fields.Get if we know the indices.
    fmt.Println("station:", station.Get(fields.ByName("station")))
    fmt.Println("frequency:", station.Get(fields.ByName("frequency")))
    fmt.Println("temperature:", station.Get(fields.ByName("temperature")))
    fmt.Println("pressure:", station.Get(fields.ByName("pressure")))
    fmt.Println("wind_speed:", station.Get(fields.ByName("wind_speed")))
    fmt.Println("conditions:", station.Get(fields.ByName("conditions")))
}
```

Currently, `hyperpb` only supports manipulating messages through the reflection
API; it shines best when you need write a very generic service that
downloads types off the network and parses messages using those types, which
forces you to use reflection.

Mutation is currently not supported; any operation which would mutate an
already-parsed message will panic. Which methods of `*hyperpb.Message` panic
is included in the documentation.

### Using types from a registry

We can use the `hyperpb.CompileFromBytes` function to parse a dynamic type and
use it to walk the fields of a message:

```go
ty := hyperpb.CompileFromBytes(encodedSchema, messageName) // Remember to cache this!

msg := hyperpb.New(ty)
if err := proto.Unmarshal(data, msg); err != nil {
    // Handle parse failure.
}

// Range will iterate over all of the populated fields in msg. Here we
// use Range with go1.24 iterator syntax.
for field, value := range msg.Range {
    // Do something with each populated field.
}
```

Since any generic, non-mutating operation will work with `hyperpb` messages,
we can use them as an efficient transcoding medium from the wire format, for
runtime-loaded messages.

```go
// Unmarshal like before.
ty := hyperpb.CompileFromBytes(encodedSchema, messageName)
msg := hyperpb.New(ty)
if err := proto.Unmarshal(data, msg); err != nil {
    // ...
}

// Dump the message to JSON. This just works!
bytes, err := protojson.Marshal(msg)
```

`protovalidate` also works directly on reflection, so it works out-of-the-box:

```go
// Unmarshal like before.
ty := hyperpb.CompileFromBytes(encodedSchema, messageName)
msg := hyperpb.New(ty)
if err := proto.Unmarshal(data, msg); err != nil {
    // Handle parse failure.
}

// Run custom validation. This just works!
err := protovalidate.Validate(msg)
```

## Advanced Usage

`hyperpb` is all about parsing as fast as possible, so there are a number of
optimization knobs available. Calling `Message.Unmarshal` directly instead
of `proto.Unmarshal` allows setting custom `UnmarshalOption`s:

```go
ty := hyperpb.CompileFromBytes(encodedSchema, messageName)
msg := hyperpb.New(ty)

// Unmarshal with custom performance knobs.
err := msg.Unmarshal(data,
    hyperpb.WithMaxDecodeMisses(16),
    // ...
)
```

The compiler also takes `CompileOptions`, such as for configuring how extensions
are resolved:

```go
ty := hyperpb.CompileFromBytes(encodedSchema, messageName,
    hyperpb.WithExtensionsFromTypes(typeRegistry),
)
```

### Memory Reuse

`hyperpb` also has a memory-reuse mechanism that side-steps the Go garbage
collector for improved allocation latency. `hyperpb.Shared` is book-keeping
state and resources shared by all messages resulting from the same parse.
After the message goes out of scope, these resources are ordinarily reclaimed
by the garbage collector.

However, a `hyperpb.Shared` can be retained after its associated message goes
away, allowing for re-use. Consider the following example of a request handler:

```go
type requestContext struct {
    shared *hyperpb.Shared
    types map[string]*hyperpb.Type
    // ...
}

func (c *requestContext) Handle(req Request) {
    // ...
    ty := types[req.Type]
    msg := c.shared.New(ty)
    defer c.shared.Free()

    c.process(msg, req, ...)
}
```

Beware that `msg` must not outlive the call to `Shared.Free`; failure to do so
will result in memory errors that Go cannot protect you from.

## Compatibility

`hyperpb` is experimental software, and the API may change drastically before
`v1`. It currently implements all Protobuf language constructs. It does not
implement mutation of parsed messages, however.

## Contributing

For a detailed explanation of the implementation details of `hyperpb`, see
the [`DESIGN.md`](DESIGN.md) file. Contributions that significantly change the
parser will require benchmarks; you can run them with `make bench`.

## Legal

Offered under the [Apache 2 license](https://github.com/bufbuild/bufplugin-go/blob/main/LICENSE).
